chore: add another Chainsaw blog (#1053)
kyverno/website: content/en/blog/general/why-chainsaw-is-unique/index.md

---
date: 2023-12-13
title: Kyverno Chainsaw - The one and only thing making Chainsaw unique!

> linkTitle: Kyverno Chainsaw - The one and only thing making Chainsaw unique

Author: Let me ask ChatGPT 😂

> linkTitle: Kyverno Chainsaw - The one and only thing making Chainsaw unique

Author: Kyverno Chainsaw - Exploring the Unique Assertion Model that Sets it Apart

> linkTitle: Kyverno Chainsaw - The one and only thing making Chainsaw unique

Author: Kyverno Chainsaw - Exploring the Assertion Model that Makes it Unique

> linkTitle: Kyverno Chainsaw - The one and only thing making Chainsaw unique

Reviewer: Kyverno Chainsaw: Assertion Models

author: Charles-Edouard Brétéché
description: The Chainsaw secret sauce!
---

![Kyverno Chainsaw](kyverno-chainsaw-horizontal.png)

While the [Chainsaw documentation](https://kyverno.github.io/chainsaw) is nice and comprehensive, I feel like the most important feature of Chainsaw deserves its own blog post for a couple of reasons:

- This is hard to make it shine out of pure documentation
- You can't appreciate Chainsaw until you understand what makes it so unique
- Seeing the feature in action is the best way to learn about it

What makes Chainsaw unique is its **_assertion model_**.

In this blog post we will deep dive into the assertion model used by Chainsaw, how it works, and how we extended something that looks like YAML but is more than that.

> After all, if Chainsaw was only about applying resources in a cluster and checking fields are set correctly on those resources it would be deceptive, some tools doing just that already exist and Chainsaw would be more or less a duplicate of those tools.

Author: This is a run-on sentence right ? Hence the `.` punctuation you added ?

> After all, if Chainsaw was only about applying resources in a cluster and checking fields are set correctly on those resources it would be deceptive, some tools doing just that already exist and Chainsaw would be more or less a duplicate of those tools.

Reviewer: Yes, those are two independent sentences.

> After all, if Chainsaw was only about applying resources in a cluster and checking fields are set correctly on those resources it would be deceptive, some tools doing just that already exist and Chainsaw would be more or less a duplicate of those tools.

Author: 👍

## Basic assertions

Let's start by reviewing the basics briefly.

### The most basic assertion

We will start with a basic assertion:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: coredns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  replicas: 2
```

When asking Chainsaw to execute the assertion above, it will look for a Deployment named `coredns` in the `kube-system` namespace and will compare the existing resource with the (partial) resource definition contained in the assertion.

> In this specific case, if `spec.replicas` is set to 2 in the existing resource, the assertion will be considered valid, if it is not equal to 2 the assertion will be considered failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this specific case, if `spec.replicas` is set to 2 in the existing resource, the assertion will be considered valid. If it is not equal to 2 the assertion will be considered failed.
```

This is the most basic assertion Chainsaw can evaluate.

## A slightly less basic assertion

A slightly less basic assertion is shown below.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  replicas: 2
```

This time we are not providing a resource name.

> Chainsaw will lookup all Deployments with the `k8s-app: kube-dns` label in the `kube-system` namespace. The assertion will be considered valid if **at least** one Deployment matches with the (partial) resource definition contained in the assertion, if none match the assertion will be considered failed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chainsaw will lookup all Deployments with the `k8s-app: kube-dns` label in the `kube-system` namespace. The assertion will be considered valid if **at least** one Deployment matches with the (partial) resource definition contained in the assertion, if none matches the assertion will be considered failed.
```

> Apart from the resource lookup process being a little bit more interesting, this kind of assertion is essentially the same as the previous one. Chainsaw is basically taking a decision by comparing an actual and expected resource.

Author: I was not sure, thanks.

### A word on timeout

Keep in mind that Chainsaw won't consider an assertion valid or failed in one shot. The assertion will be continuously evaluated during a predetermined period of time until the assertion succeeds or the timeout expires.

## It's good but it's not enough

> Now we covered the basic assertions we can look at their limitations and how Chainsaw solves them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we covered the basic assertions we can look at their limitations and how Chainsaw solves them.
```

> Keep in mind that Chainsaw won't consider an assertion valid or failed in one shot. The assertion will constinuously evaluated during a predetermined period until the assertion succeeds or the timeout expires.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that Chainsaw won't consider an assertion valid or failed in one shot. The assertion will continuously evaluated during a predetermined period until the assertion succeeds or the timeout expires.
```

Basic assertions cover the simple cases but:

- Working with arrays is not easy
    - How are we supposed to compare arrays with different sizes?
    - How can we check a specific item in an array is present?
- Matching exact values is not always what we want
    - How can we verify the number of replicas is above a certain number (not exactly this number)?
    - How can we apply a regex to a label?

> The examples above are the most obvious ones, still they demonstrate that an assertion model needs to be more rich and more flexible than simple comparisons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the examples above are the most obvious ones, they demonstrate that an assertion model needs to be more rich and more flexible than simple comparisons.
```

### Overview of the Chainsaw Assertion Model

> Let's see how Chainsaw can assert that the number of replicas of a Deployment is greater than a certain threshold, let's look at how it can be written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how Chainsaw can assert that the number of replicas of a Deployment is greater than a certain threshold. Let's look at how it can be written.
```

run-on

Author: `Let's` appears twice in this short sentence.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  (replicas > 2): true
```

> In the assertion above the **key part** of the YAML syntax contains a [JMESPath](https://jmespath.site) expression, the evaluation of this expression will be compared to the **value part** of the YAML syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the assertion above, the **key part** of the YAML syntax contains a [JMESPath](https://jmespath.site) expression. The evaluation of this expression will be compared to the **value part** of the YAML syntax.
```

run-on

> In this case, the expression is simple but represents the main concept behind the Chainsaw assertion model. At every node in the YAML tree, Chainsaw can create a projection of the being processed element and pass the result of this projection to the descendants. When a leaf of the tree is reached a comparison happens and if the comparison fails the assertion will be considered failed. If all comparisons succeed the assertion will be considered valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the expression is simple but represents the main concept behind the Chainsaw assertion model. At every node in the YAML tree, Chainsaw can create a projection of the element currently being processed and pass the result of this projection to the descendants. When a leaf of the tree is reached, a comparison happens. If the comparison fails, the assertion will be considered failed. If all comparisons succeed, the assertion will be considered valid.
```

### Working with arrays

Working with arrays can be challenging. To manipulate arrays, Chainsaw leverages JMESPath capabilities to allow easy filtering and projections.

Let's say we want an assertion to consider only containers that have no security context defined.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      (containers[?securityContext == null]):
        (len(@)): 0
```

> In the assertion above, the first three fileds `spec`, `template`, and `spec` are basic projections that simply take the content of their respective fields and pass that to descendants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the assertion above, the first three fields `spec`, `template`, and `spec` are basic projections that simply take the content of their respective fields and pass that to descendants.
```

`(containers[?securityContext == null])` is a JMESPath expression filtering the `containers` array, selecting only the element where `securityContext` is `null`. This projection results in a new array that is passed to the descendant (`(len(@))` in this case).

> Finally `(len(@))` is reached, it's another JMESPath expression that computes the length of the array. There's no more descendant at this point, we're of a leaf of the YAML tree, and the array length we just computed is then compared against 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(len(@))` is another JMESPath expression that computes the length of the array. There's no more descendant at this point. We're at a leaf of the YAML tree and the array length we just computed is then compared against 0.
```

> If the comparison matches, the assertion will be considered valid, if not it will be considered failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the comparison matches, the assertion will be considered valid; if not, it will be considered failed.
```

> Finally `(len(@))` is reached, it's another JMESPath expression that computes the lenght of the array. There's no more descendant at this point, we're of a leaf of the YAML tree, the array length we just computed is then compared against 0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally `(len(@))` is reached, it's another JMESPath expression that computes the length of the array. There's no more descendant at this point, we're of a leaf of the YAML tree, the array length we just computed is then compared against 0.
```

In simple words, the assertion above checks that all containers in the Deployment have a security context configured.

### Iterating over arrays (or maps)

Being able to filter arrays allows selecting the elements to be processed.

> On top of that Chainsaw allows iterating over array elements to validate each item separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On top of that, Chainsaw allows iterating over array elements to validate each item separately.
```

The assertion above can be rewritten using an iterator:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      # the ~ modifier tells Chainsaw to iterate over the array elements
      ~.(containers):
        securityContext: {}
```

This assertion uses the `~` modifier and Chainsaw will evaluate descendants once per element in the array.

> ### Explict bindings and reference

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Explicit bindings and reference
```

When passing from a parent node to descendant nodes, it can be useful to keep a reference to one or more parent nodes.

> Let's say we want to consider the pod level security context too, we can write such an assertion with the syntax below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we want to consider the pod-level security context in addition to the container-level security context. We can write such an assertion with the syntax below:
```

run-on

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  template:
    (spec)->specBinding:
      # the ~ modifier tells Chainsaw to iterate over the array elements
      ~.(containers):
        ($specBinding.securityContext != null || securityContext != null): true
```

In the assertion above, `(spec)->specBinding` means that Chainsaw will keep a reference to the result of the expression evaluation and will make it available to descendants under the `$specBinding` binding.

> Now we can use the binding to write the assertion check taking the pod level security context into account like this `($specBinding.securityContext != null || securityContext != null): true`.

Reviewer: This is complex. You should write at least one sentence describing, in plain English, what this assertion does. Based on studying the example and what you wrote, it's something like: "This assertion checks to ensure that, if any container's securityContext is not defined, the Pod-level securityContext is defined."

Author: Done, thanks.

> ### Give me more

Author: I don't like this title, @chipzoller do you have a suggestion for a better one ?

Author: (above is a run-on sentence ? ;-) )

Author: I don't like this title. @chipzoller do you have a suggestion for a better one ?

Author: ## What else

Reviewer: "More" is fine.

Author: Like What more ?

We covered all major features of assertion trees in this blog post.

> Chainsaw doesn't directly implement assertion trees but relies on the [kyverno-json package](https://github.com/kyverno/kyverno-json). You can browse [this documentation](https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/policies/asserts/#assertion-trees) to learn more about assertion trees, this also applies to Chainsaw.

Reviewer 3: It would be super helpful to link to the playground as well https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/_playground/.

Author: Thanks, done.

> Chainsaw doesn't directly implement assertion trees but relies on the [kyverno-json package](https://github.com/kyverno/kyverno-json). You can browse [this documentation](https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/policies/asserts/#assertion-trees) to learn more about assertion trees, this also applies to Chainsaw.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chainsaw doesn't directly implement assertion trees but relies on the [kyverno-json package](https://github.com/kyverno/kyverno-json). You can browse [the documentation](https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/policies/asserts/#assertion-trees) to learn more about assertion trees which also applies to Chainsaw.
```

> Chainsaw doesn't directly implements assertion trees but relies on the [kyverno-json package](https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/policies/asserts/#assertion-trees). You can browse this documentation to learn more about assertion trees, this documentation also applies to Chainsaw.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chainsaw doesn't directly implement assertion trees but relies on the [kyverno-json package](https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-json/policies/asserts/#assertion-trees). You can browse this documentation to learn more about assertion trees, this documentation also applies to Chainsaw.
```

> JMESpath supports functions and also allows custom functions to be registered in the JMESPath interpreter. The supported functions list is available on this [documentation page](https://kyverno.github.io/chainsaw/latest/jp/functions/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JMESPath supports functions and also allows custom functions to be registered in the JMESPath interpreter. The supported list of functions is available [here](https://kyverno.github.io/chainsaw/latest/jp/functions/).
```

## Conclusion

> I hope this blog post will help understand what assertion trees are and how they work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope this blog post helps you understand what assertion trees are and how they work.
```

> Simple tests usually don't need that level of flexibility but it comes very handy when your tests need to become more complex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simple tests usually only need simple capabilities, but assertion trees can come in very handy when your tests become more complex.
```

> I hope this blog post will help understanding what assertion trees are and how they work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I hope this blog post will help understand what assertion trees are and how they work.
```

---
date: 2023-12-13
title: Kyverno Chainsaw - Exploring the Assertion Model that Makes it Unique!
linkTitle: Kyverno Chainsaw - Exploring the Assertion Model that Makes it Unique
author: Charles-Edouard Brétéché
description: The Chainsaw Secret Sauce!
---

![Kyverno Chainsaw](kyverno-chainsaw-horizontal.png)

While the [Chainsaw documentation](https://kyverno.github.io/chainsaw) is nice and comprehensive, I feel like the most important feature of Chainsaw deserves its own blog post for a couple of reasons:

- This is hard to make it shine out of pure documentation
- You can't appreciate Chainsaw until you understand what makes it so unique
- Seeing the feature in action is the best way to learn about it

What makes Chainsaw unique is its **_assertion model_**.

In this blog post we will deep dive into the assertion model used by Chainsaw, how it works, and how we extended something that looks like YAML but is more than that.

> After all, if Chainsaw was only about applying resources in a cluster and checking fields are set correctly on those resources it would be deceptive. There are tools which can do that today and Chainsaw would be more or less redundant.

Author: @JimBugwadia do you suggest to remove this paragraph ?

This is the most basic assertion Chainsaw can evaluate.

### A slightly less basic assertion

A slightly less basic assertion is shown below.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  replicas: 2
```

This time we are not providing a resource name.

Chainsaw will look up all Deployments with the `k8s-app: kube-dns` label in the `kube-system` namespace. The assertion will be considered valid if **at least one** Deployment matches with the (partial) resource definition contained in the assertion. If none matches the assertion will be considered failed.

Apart from the resource lookup process being a little bit more interesting, this kind of assertion is essentially the same as the previous one. Chainsaw is basically making a decision by comparing an actual and expected resource.

### A word on timeout

Keep in mind that Chainsaw won't consider an assertion valid or failed in one shot. The assertion will be continuously evaluated during a predetermined period of time until the assertion succeeds or the timeout expires.

> ## It's good but it's not enough

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## It's good, but not enough
```
